I'm here today to talk about thinking
for yourself. And I must admit, I did
use AI to help me think about it.
[laughter]
The the irony is not lost on me. But the
way I did so is not by using AI as an
assistant to help me prepare this talk
faster. Rather, I use AI as a tool for
thought. And by the end of this talk, I
would have explained what I mean by
that, why it's important, and given you
a glimpse of how it might work. But
first, I need to set the scene. Let's
look at a day in the life of a 21st
century knowledge worker. I arrive at my
office and look at my inbox full of
emails.
Let's summarize it. Okay, I'm struggling
to figure out how to respond here. So,
let's get AI to write a response. Next,
I need to write a report, but I'm struck
by the blank page problem. I know I'll
drop in some resources and get an AI
draft. Looks good to me. By the way,
writer's block used to be staring at a
blank page. Now, it's staring at a page
that AI filled out for me and wondering
if I agree with it. I've become a
professional validator of a robot's
opinions.
I've got some data to analyze. Maybe AI
can analyze this data for me. Probably
correct. Okay, I've got to make a deck
as well. You know the drill. All right.
Oh, I was supposed to prototype
something as well. Uh, okay. Let me vibe
code something. All right. All this
looks good. Let's go. This isn't a
vision of the future. This is a
completely plausible, if slightly
exaggerated, picture of the world of
knowledge work today. Welcome to the age
of outsourced reason where the knowledge
worker no longer engages with the
materials of their craft. We've become
intellectual tourists. In our own work,
we visit ideas. We don't inhabit them.
Our relationship to our work is entirely
intermediated by AI. Some might say
alienated. We've heard that story
before. What's wrong with this picture?
For one thing, it's only one step
removed from this, which is important,
but that's a different talk. What I want
to focus on today is that using AI in
this way can have profound implications
on human thought. Consider creativity.
On an individual level, we might think
that AI is a creativity boost, giving us
rapid access to new ideas. But numerous
studies have shown that on a collective
level, knowledge workers using AI
assistants produce a smaller range of
ideas than a group working manually.
We've created a hive mind, except the
hive is really boring and keeps
suggesting the same five ideas. Consider
critical thinking. We surveyed knowledge
workers about their use of AI. They
reported that they put less effort into
critical thinking when working with AI
[clears throat] than when working
manually. And this effect was greater
when they had greater confidence in AI
and less confidence in themselves.
Consider memory. When people rely on AI
to write for them, they remember less of
what they wrote. And when they read AI
generated summaries, it's hardly
surprising that they remember less than
if they'd read the document. And
finally, consider metacognition, which
is the ability to think about your own
thinking process. Working with AI
requires significant metacognitive
reasoning about your task goals,
decomposing the task, the applicability
of genai, your ability to evaluate the
output. These are things which are built
into the process of working directly
with the material and which become
problematic when that material
engagement becomes intermediated.
Basically, we've become middle managers
for our own thoughts. So, what's the
score? We have fewer ideas. We think
about them less critically. We remember
them less well. and we have a harder
time doing it. Taken together, we can
see that AI assisted workflows can have
profound effects on human thinking. And
this extends even to seemingly trivial,
mundane tasks because these everyday
opportunities for exercising our
creativity, our critical thinking, and
our memory are essential for protecting
our cognitive musculature and allow us
to rise to the occasion when an
exceptionally complex task comes our
way. Studies show that when we don't use
our brains, they get worse at brain
things. Nobel Prize Committee, please
hold your applause.
Is this the cost of progress?
We've solved the problem of having to
think. Unfortunately, thinking wasn't
actually a problem. It's like it's like
we invented a cure for exercise and then
wondered why we're out of breath all the
time. You know, doesn't have to be this
way.
Beyond AI as an assistant, I believe
that AI should be a tool for thought. AI
should challenge, not obey. And I
believe that right at this moment we are
at a critical juncture where the world
of work is poised to be transformed by
generative AI. And we must act now to
shape and drive that transformation
towards humanistic values. Of these two
diverging roads, we must take the one
less traveled. Beyond getting the job
done, a tool for thought helps us better
understand the job. Beyond getting it
done faster, it helps us get it done
better. Beyond getting us to the right
answers, a tool for thought helps us ask
the right questions. Beyond automating
known processes, it helps us explore the
unknown. What does this look like? What
I'm about to show you is a prototype
developed by my colleagues and me at the
tools for thought team at Microsoft
Research in Cambridge. Now, please bear
in mind that this is a live research
prototype. It's not a product and it's
just one of a series of explorations
that our team is conducting to study how
different modes of working with AI can
enhance human thought. So, let's look at
a fictitious example. Clara and her
colleagues run a company that sells
bottled beverages. They've just had a
meeting to discuss a new industry report
that seems to have some pretty important
findings about consumer preferences for
sustainable packaging. Clara's
colleagues have asked her to write a
proposal arguing for how the company
ought to respond. So, she really needs
to get to grips with this proposal. She
really needs to get to grips with this
report, understand its findings and its
data and how it fits into her business
context. She starts by loading some
documents into her workspace. There's
the meeting transcript to remind her
what was discussed. Uh there's a recent
internal report from her own business.
Uh and of course there's the industry
report which she opens. She sees an
overview of the document along with
section bysection summaries. Except
these aren't really just summaries. We
think of them more as lenses. They're
customizable micro representations of
the text that can emphasize what is most
relevant to the task at hand. So in this
case, Claraara selects the consumer's
lens.
She can select a section for deeper
reading. In this case, the first one. As
she reads, she makes notes about her
thoughts and highlights excerpts from
the document.
As she reads, she also sees AI generated
commentary and critiques. We call these
provocations. Here's a provocation that
raises a potential opportunity which she
highlights and annotates. Note how this
process is a hybrid of completely manual
reading and completely relying on AI to
read for you. Clara still reads, but
intentionally and strategically.
Now, as Claraara is working, she's
building up an outline of her argument
manually in this pane on the right. This
outline is lightly structured and allows
her to sketch out the flow of her
argument at a high level while still
retaining deep connections and being
grounded in the source documents. As a
result of which, we can already generate
a draft of the proposal. And Clara can
do things here like add a heading to the
outline to generate a paragraph. But
what I want to draw your attention to
here is that while this text is AI
generated, Clara has a completely
different relationship to this text than
if she just dropped in some documents
and said, "Write me a report." Because
this text is deeply rooted in a
cognitively effortful but
interactionally effortless thought
process. It reflects Clara's decisions,
Clara's judgments, Clara's unique
personal professional expertise.
She sees another provocation, this time
in the outline. In this case, she
decides that while the provocation is
useful, she does not need to address it.
Unlike typical AI suggestions,
provocations are not meant to be
applicable all the time. They're instead
meant to stimulate your thinking about
your work. Because if you understand
your work well enough, deeply enough to
make the confident to make the confident
decision not to accept a piece of
feedback, then the feedback process is
still working as intended. But we're not
done yet. Clara has entirely new ways of
interacting with this text because of
generative AI. A really simple example
is that she can just resize a paragraph
to change its length. She can also
rapidly test different versions of this
text. For instance, in this paragraph,
she's wondering whether it would be more
effective if it took a more
inspirational or more practical tone.
So, she selects one of these
customizable dimensions and previews a
few alternatives and selects one. And at
select strategic points, indeed, she
writes. As she writes, she sees
provocations that rather than
autocompleting her ideas, they raise
alternatives. They identify fallacies.
They offer counter-arguments to help her
strengthen and develop her own argument.
There's something you won't find
anywhere in this interface, and that's a
chat box. Clara's not having to chat
with anything to do her work. Yet, she
is silently and appropriately assisted
by her computer as a computer and not as
an ursat human. To put it simply, we
have gone from this
to this. Throughout this process,
Claraara has been assisted and yes,
probably worked faster because of AI.
But she's also maintained direct
material engagement at strategic points.
She read the relevant portions of the
document herself. She constructed her
decisions and her argument herself and
ultimately it can be said she has
written this document herself. Moreover,
she worked better because of AI. AI
provocations at every stage of the
process kept her metacognitively
engaged, always looking for critiques,
alternatives, and lateral moves. We have
been studying the effects of tools like
this and the results are promising.
You can demonstraably reintroduce
critical thinking into AI assisted
workflows. You can reverse the loss of
creativity and enhance it instead. You
can build powerful tools for memory that
enable knowledge workers to read and
write at speed with greater
intentionality and remember it too. It
turns out with the right principles of
design, you can build tools that are the
best of both worlds. applying the
awesome speed and flexibility of this
technology to protect and enhance human
thought. These are simple general
principles like ensuring that the tool
preserves material material engagement,
offers productive resistance and
scaffolds metacognition.
And while we've been primarily studying
professional knowledge workers, we
believe that these principles can extend
to all aspects of AI use, including when
we use it in our daily lives, our
hobbies, and even in education. I
repeat, efficiency is not the aim of
tools for thought. Better thinking is,
but sometimes you can have both. I used
to think there was no such thing as a
free lunch in human thinking. This is so
much better than a free lunch. This is a
lunch that pays you to eat it.
I want to close with some thoughts on
the values that we have in developing AI
software. What if AI gets to the point
where it can do a better job of thinking
than humans? Why should we care so much
about protecting and augmenting human
thought? There's two reasons. First,
there may always be ways of thinking
that remain unique human strengths of
which we may not even be aware. Second,
perhaps more importantly, we take the
position that the ability to think well
is essential for human agency and
empowerment and flourishing. This echoes
an ancient question. People once asked,
you know, if writing, if books, if the
internet can remember for us, does it
matter that we cannot? People once asked
if maps can navigate for us, does it
matter that we cannot? Now we ask, if
machines can think for us, does it
matter that we cannot? If machines can
speak for us, grieve for us, pray for
us, love for us, does it matter that we
cannot? To me, the answer is pretty
obvious. When I began studying human AI
interaction 13 years ago, it was
inconceivable to me that we would be
asking these questions in my lifetime.
But we are, and we must. I leave you
with this thought. What would you rather
have? A tool that thinks for you or a
tool that makes you think.
>> [applause]